# README

\#Executive summary This executive summary should provide information
on - the dataset you’re using, - your research question(s), - your
methodology, and your findings. The executive summary is worth 15 points
and will be evaluated based on whether it follows guidance and whether
it’s concise but detailed enough.

# Executive Summary

## An analysis of contraceptive knowledge, practice and unmet need among currently married women aged 15-49 based on demographic characteristics in Myanmar

## Research Question

### How do demographic characteristics influence contraceptive knowledge, practices and unmet need among currently married women aged 15-49 in Myanmar?

## Background

Sufficient knowledge of contraceptive methods, contraceptive utilization
and reduction of unmet need are crucial to reducing unintended and
unwanted pregnancies and abortions. Many studies show that
socio-demographic characteristics influence contraceptive usage among
reproductive-aged women in developing countries. Our project was
designed to assess the differences of contraceptive knowledge, practice
and unmet need and their associations among currently married women aged
15-49 according to demographic characteristics in Myanmar.

Myanmar, located in Southeast Asia, consists of 7 states, 7 regions, and
1 union territory. The different terms “state” and “region” are
intentionally used in Myanmar to differentiate the geographical
locations between one dominant ethnic population, which is Bamar, with
the majority residing in the regions and other ethnic minority
populations typically inhabiting the states. Since 1962, certain regions
such as Chin, Kachin, Kayin, and Rakhine states have experienced
significant armed conflicts between pro-Bamar government military forces
and ethnic armed groups. Consequently, these conflict-affected areas lag
behind in terms of development, facing disparities, for instance, access
to healthcare, and education compared to their non-conflicted
counterparts. Specifically focusing on healthcare, significant
disparities exist in health service accessibility across different
ethnic populations, influenced by various demographic characteristics,
including conflict-affected situations. However, there is limited
data-driven evidence to quantify the extent of these disparities at the
state/region level. To address this gap, we conducted an analysis using
a nationally representative dataset to examine the associations between
demographic characteristics and family planning service accessibility
inequities in Myanmar. Our mission was to provide vital insights to
policymakers, implementation partners, and donors, empowering them to
tailor strategic and targeted family planning services to communities
most in need.

## Data Analysis

For our research question, we used the Demographic and Health Surveys
(DHS) dataset, conducted by the Ministry of Health and Sports (MoHS) in
Myanmar in 2016. This survey employed stratified two-stage cluster
sampling and weighted sample size calculation methods to ensure national
representativeness and validity. The dataset encompasses a wide range of
demographic and health-related information, including family planning
practices among women aged 15-49. Among all the available datasets, we
selected the family planning dataset, which is an individual-level
dataset that focuses specifically on family planning knowledge and
practices of women aged 15-49, with a total of 12,885 participants.
However, while information of contraceptive knowledge was collected for
all reproductive-aged women regardless of marital status, the the survey
only interviewed currently married women for their contraceptive
practices. Therefore, we selecte  
his approach allowed us for a more meaningful comparison of
contraceptive knowledge, practices, and unmet needs.

Our Key variables are as below: - Demographic characteristics: age (5-yr
group), location (region/state), residence (urban/rural), education,
wealth index - Outcome: contraceptive knowledge, practice, unmet need
(Binary outcome: Yes/No) To facilitate this analysis, we stratified
exposure variables based on demographic features and research interests.
Specifically, we changed age as a continuous variable into categorical
one with 5-year group. We also divided regional locations into
**conflict-affected states and non-conflicted states**, the type of
residence into urban and rural areas, and education status into four
levels - no education, primary education, secondary education, and
higher education, wealth index into five levels - poorest, poorer,
middle, richer, and richest.

For the data analysis, we employed some data visualization tools to
examine differences in contraceptive knowledge and practices among women
based on demographic characteristics. We conducted comparisons for each
demographic characteristic and further investigated the extent of
changes by combining certain variables. Besides, we assessed whether
these characteristics were associated with contraceptive knowledge,
practice and unmet needs by using regression models. First, we analyzed
the data without considering sampling weight. However, recognizing the
importance of generalizability and representativeness, we incorporated
sampling weight into our analysis. Upon comparing the findings of these
two analyses and finding no significant difference, we utilized survey
weights in all subsequent analyses to ensure generalizability and
representativeness.

## Key Findings

### Contraceptive Knowledge

Women with higher education demonstrate a greater proportion of
contraceptive knowledge compared to those with lower or no education.
Among age groups, the youngest (15-19 years) exhibit the lowest
proportion of contraceptive knowledge, particularly evident among
younger women with no education. Women in regions generally have equal
or higher knowledge proportions compared to those in states across all
wealth index groups, except for the richer group, where women in states
show higher knowledge proportions. Urban residents consistently display
higher contraceptive knowledge across all wealth index groups, except
for the poorest group, where urban residents in states have lower
knowledge proportions than rural residents. These findings underscore
the variability in contraceptive knowledge among women, even within
regions, influenced by residence and wealth. In combination of location,
residence, and wealth index, relatively impoverished women in rural
areas within states tend to have less contraceptive knowledge.

### Contraceptive Practice

The proportion of contraceptive method usage generally increases with
education levels, with *certain age groups (25-40 years)* displaying the
highest proportion of contraception. However, younger and older women
with lower education levels tend to have lower usage of contraceptive
methods. Regarding location, residence and wealth index, poorer women
from state and rural are less likely to use contraceptive methods. In
particular, women living in regions have a higher proportion of
contraceptive practice compared to those living in states. Similarly,
women living in urban were more likely to use contraceptive methods than
those living in rural. Furthermore, the proportion of contraceptive
usage increases with higher wealth index.

### Unmet Need

The proportion of unmet need decreases with higher education levels.
Regarding age groups, *middle age groups (25-40 years) exhibit lower
proportions compared to the youngest (15-19) and oldest (45-49) age
groups*. Within age and education strata, younger and older women with
lower education levels are more likely to experience unmet need.
Additionally, the proportion of unmet need is lower among women living
in regions compared to those in states, with a similar pattern observed
in urban and rural areas. Moreover, as the wealth index rises, the
likelihood of unmet need decreases. When considering the combination of
location, residence, and wealth, poorer women from rural areas within
states are more likely to experience unmet need.

### Comparison between Regions and States

Generally, women living in regions have higher knowledge and practice of
contraceptive and lower unmet needs compared to those living in state.
However, we found disparities within regions, after stratified by age
groups, education, residence and wealth index. For instance, women aged
between 15 and 19 years, living in regions have lesser contraceptive
knowledge compared to those women living in states.

The most common contraceptive methods used in Myanmar are injection and
pills (50.20% and 26.1% respectively).

### Regressions

These regression results indicate that while living in regions, being in
the age groups of 20-39, and having secondary education, being in the
richer and richest wealth index group are associated with increased
likelihoods of contraceptive use, those factors are associated with
decreased likelihoods of unmet need. *I don’t see urban/rural in the
analysis*

## Conclusions

The findings underscore disparities in accessing knowledge, practicing
contraceptive methods, and experiencing unmet needs across various
demographic characteristics and their combinations. For example, women
residing in rural areas within specific regions tend to have lower
levels of knowledge and practice regarding contraception, alongside
higher rates of unmet needs compared to their counterparts in urban
areas within states. Our findings were reinforced by the use of sampling
weights, enhancing the representativeness of our analysis. However,
several limitations exist. Firstly, certain confounding factors were not
accounted for in our analysis. Secondly, due to data and time
constraints, not all demographic characteristics could be included.
Lastly, as the dataset dates back to 2016, our findings may not fully
reflect the current situation. Nevertheless, our results remain valuable
for informing policymakers, implementation partners, and donors, guiding
strategic and targeted interventions. Additionally, they can serve as a
basis for evaluating the effectiveness of ongoing reproductive health
projects and contraceptive provision initiatives.

*to add key findings*

*to add dashboard link if feasible*

*to add references*
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9678470/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7837347/ *to shorten the
current texts*

Myanmar, also known as Burma, is located in Southeast Asia, sharing
borders with several countries, including Bangladesh to the west, India
to the northwest, China to the northeast, Laos to the east, and Thailand
to the southeast. Administratively, it consists of 7 states, 7 regions,
and 1 union territory. The total population is approximately 52 million,
comprising a diverse range of 135 ethnic groups. The different terms
“state” and “region” are intentionally used in Myanmar to differentiate
the geographical locations between one dominant ethnic population, which
is Bamar, accounting for 68% of the total population, with the majority
residing in the regions and other ethnic minority populations typically
inhabiting the states.

Since 1962, certain regions such as Chin, Kachin, Kayin, and Rakhine
states have experienced significant armed conflicts between pro-Bamar
government military forces and ethnic armed groups. Consequently, these
conflict-affected areas lag behind in terms of development, facing
disparities, for instance, access to healthcare, and education compared
to their non-conflicted counterparts.

Specifically focusing on healthcare, significant disparities exist in
health service accessibility across different ethnic populations,
influenced by various demographic characteristics, including
conflict-affected situations. However, there is limited data-driven
evidence to quantify the extent of these disparities at the state/region
level. To address this gap, we conducted an analysis using a nationally
representative dataset to examine the associations between demographic
characteristics and family planning service accessibility inequities in
Myanmar.

For the analysis, we used the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)
dataset, conducted by the Ministry of Health and Sports (MoHS) in
Myanmar with funding support from USAID in 2016. This survey employed
stratified two-stage cluster sampling and weighted sample size
calculation methods to ensure national representativeness and validity.
The dataset encompasses a wide range of demographic and health-related
information, including family planning practices among women aged 15-49,
producing a series of datasets for different levels of households and
individuals. Among all the available datasets, we selected the family
planning dataset, which is an individual-level dataset that focuses
specifically on family planning knowledge and practices of women aged
15-49, with a total of 12,885 participants. Our assumption in choosing
this dataset is that family planning services using contraceptive
methods that allow people to determine how many children and when they
want to attain children is one of the widely used indicators to measure
health inequities among different populations. *to write more about
current married women*

Given our research focus on health equities among ethnic populations, we
formulated our research question: How do demographic characteristics
influence contraceptive knowledge, practices and unmet need among
different ethnic groups? We categorized exposure variables such as age,
regional location, type of residence, education status, and wealth index
while outcome variables included knowledge, practice and unmet need of
contraception among current married women aged 15-49. To facilitate this
analysis, we stratified exposure variables based on demographic features
and research interests. Specifically, we divided regional locations into
conflict-affected states and non-conflicted states, the type of
residence into urban and rural areas, and education status into four
levels - no education, primary education, secondary education, and
higher education. *to write age and wealth index* Outcome variables,
knowledge, practice and unmet need of contraception were assessed among
women in selected regions and states, with varying participant sizes
based on eligibility criteria.
